---
layout: page
subheadline:  "It is almost Q2 2022 already!"
title:  "It has been more than a year (again)"
header: no
show_meta: true
#mathjax: true

---

It is always incredible how time can pass. A year ago, I came back from Berlin and wrote an update post for this website. Since that happened, a lot has changed. In the last 12 months, I have had the opportunity to spend time in eight countries. I was able to conclude many phases in life and start others. I am still serving as a bridge between industry and academia, trying to cross-pollinate and bring applied innovation.
For this website, I am unsure what its future should be. I always wanted to keep here a regular blog. It is, however, not very easy to update and the website itself is not highly tailored for SEO and other marketing optimization techniques. There is also the topic of distribution, how to reach a large audience? Possibly, writing regularly for something such as substack is the better option. On this matter, I am keen on developing ideas around what I call "Product-led Data Science." The objective is to present and debate techniques around machine learning and data science that help improve digital products, address the users and customers of those products better, and help the businesses behind maximize their profits. I am undecided on the audience for this type of content. It is not for the academic, but there are enormous possibilities that I could address within the practitioner community. Possibly, for the marketing expert, it might be too technical. One persona might be the "Technical Marketing Lead" and another one the "Data Science Expert who wants to get more domain knowledge."
The next question is on the type of content. Should it be tutorials or rather interviews? Should I write rants and diatribes? Or should I spend time trying to summarize and digest the latest developments in the space? I also do not have here an exact idea. I know that it should be something where I can output one article per week. Possibly, one option might be introductory articles on famous data science topics but applied to product-led, for example, "clustering customers." Likely, I should start writing and see the reactions. In the end, regularity and discipline trumps talent 
So, this is where I currently stand, and I am sure that you will see more soon. Hopefully, it will not be so that there will be a year without updates again.
